Eat Right
Food, Nutrition and Health Tips from the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
Eating Right and Reduce Food Waste
GO FURTHER with FOOD by incorporating these food, nutrition and physical activity tips
People rarely talk about the foods they toss out, yet the topic of food waste is getting a lot
more attention these days.
It’s been estimated that Americans throw away billions of pounds of food each year either at
home or when eating out. And that amount doesn’t even include the food that goes uneaten
at the grocery store or the crops that are left in farmers’ felds.
Not all food that is wasted can be saved and eaten, but it’s been proven that a lot of food
waste could be prevented, especially at home.
A good place to start is right in your own kitchen. Here are a few tips that will help.
Plan Meals Based on the Foods You Already
Have on Hand.
Get Creative with Leftovers
Transform meals into soups, salads or sandwiches by
cutting up leftover veggies and cooked meats.
• Look in the refrigerator, freezer and pantry
for foods that need to be used up.
• Write a list of the ingredients you still need.
• Use as a topping for salads or cooked grains
like rice or pasta.
• Buy only the amount of perishable foods that
can be eaten or frozen within a few days. This
is especially true for foods, like fresh fruits,
vegetables, meats, dairy products
and seafood.
• Wrap in a tortilla or stuf into a pita for a
satisfying sandwich.
• Combine to make soup, then enjoy or freeze
for future use.
• Eat as a leftover meal later in the week.
• Or simply brown bag the leftovers for lunch.
Master the Shelf Life of Foods
Many foods and drinks purchased at the grocery
store include a date, which indicates when it should
be used or sold by. Because these dates refer to the
product’s quality, it doesn’t necessarily mean they
should be thrown out.
• “Use by”, “Best by” and “Best Before” dates
are found on foods, such as mustard, salad
dressing and ketchup. These products
usually don’t need to be refrigerated until
opened. In many cases, they are safe to eat
beyond the date as long as they have been
stored properly.
• “Sell by” dates are displayed on perishable
foods, such as meats and dairy products. It’s
possible these foods may be used a few days
after that date, as long as they were stored at
a safe temperature.
• Learn which fruits and vegetables to store
in the refrigerator. Some produce will cause
other fruits and vegetables to ripen quickly,
so they need to be separated. And others
should be stored in a cool, dark, dry place.
Check out eatright.org for more
information.
Other Ways to Go Further with Food
• Be mindful of portion sizes. Choose smaller
portions to stay within your calorie needs, as
MyPlate recommends.
• Order smaller sizes of foods and drinks when
eating away from home. Or ask for a to-go
container at the start of a meal.
• Learn how to properly can or dehydrate foods
at home.
• Donate extra foods that are still safe to eat to
a local food pantry or shelter.
• Consider composting.
Practice Good Food Safety
• Don’t risk eating or drinking anything that
you suspect has spoiled.
• Eat leftovers within 3 to 4 days (or freeze for
up to 3 to 4 months).
• Test your food safety knowledge or fnd
out if it’s time to toss those foods by
downloading FoodKeeper App
on foodsafety.gov.
• Create ideal storage conditions
• Store foods in the pantry so that products
with closer dates are up front.
• Place foods that could spoil quickly within
sight, such as in the front of the refrigerator
or on the counter (if they’re not perishable).
Wait to wash produce until right
before serving.
For a referral to a registered dietitian nutritionist
and for additional food and nutrition
information, visit eatright.org.
The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics is the world’s
largest organization of food and nutrition professionals.
The Academy is committed to improving health and
advancing the profession of dietetics through research,
education and advocacy.
This tip sheet is provided by:
Authored by Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics staf registered dietitian nutritionists.
Sources: Let’s Talk Trash, USDA ChooseMyPlate.gov; The State of America’s Wasted Food & Opportunities to Make a Diference. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics
Foundation, 2016; Leftovers and Food Safety, USDA Food Safety and Inspection Service.
©2021 Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Reproduction of this tip sheet is permitted for educational purposes. Reproduction for sales purposes is not authorized.